## PixelAudio

PixelAudio is a Processing Library that maps arrays of audio samples onto arrays of pixel values using space-filling curves such as a zigzag or a Hilbert curve. You can turn a 2D image into an audio signal or turn a 1D signal (including live or recorded audio) into a 2D image. PixelAudio began as a _color organ_, where sine waves mapped to Hilbert curve determined the pixel values (RGB colors) in a bitmap traversed by the curve. It later added a real time sampling instrument that can be played by drawing lines. Here's an example of the color organ, an excerpt from a large scale animation and musical performance: https://vimeo.com/767814419. There's a brief video of the drawing features here: https://vimeo.com/1031707765. 

### Installing and Running PixelAudio

To start with, you'll need to have Processing installed and configured. If this is all new to you, go to the [Download webpage](https://processing.org/download "Download webpage") for Processing and install it. Then check out the [Environment documentation](https://processing.org/environment "Environment documentation") with particular attention to setting the location of your [Sketchbook folder](https://processing.org/environment/#sketches-and-sketchbook "Sketchbook folder"). The path to the Sketchbook folder is typically something like "/Users/_your_home_directory_/Documents/Processing/". Once you have the path configured, navigate to the Sketchbook folder. It contains a number of folders, including one called "libraries." 

To install PixelAudio, go to the [Releases page](https://github.com/Ignotus-mago/PixelAudio/releases "Releases page") and download the latest version of PixelAudio. Extract the files from the downloaded archive. You should end up with one folder, "PixalAudio". Move it into the "libraries" folder in your Sketchbook folder. That's all you need to do to install the PixelAudio library, or any other Processing library. At this point, if you haven't already done so, it's a good idea to create a folder for your Processing sketches in the "Processing" folder. 

PixelAudio has no dependencies on other libraries, but to run the examples that come with it you will need to install some additional libraries, which you can do from the Processing Sketch->Import Library...->Manage Libraries... menu command. This opens the Contribution Manager dialog. You will need to install the **Minim** library to use nearly all the sketches in the PixelAudio examples. Other libraries used in the examples are **Video Export**, by Abe Pazos, **oscP5**, by Andreas Schlegel, and the **G4P** library, by Peter Lager. I also recommend you install the **Sound** library and **Video Library for Processing 4**, both from the Processing Foundation. 

The [Minim Audio Library](https://code.compartmental.net/tools/minim/ "Minim Audio Library") is the one I use most extensively. 

### How PixelAudio Works

In PixelAudio classes, 1D signals and 2D bitmaps are related to each other through lookup tables (LUTs) that map locations in the signal and bitmap arrays onto one another. You could think of the signal tracing a path over the bitmap, visiting every pixel. The `signalToImageLUT`in `PixelAudioMapper` lists the position index in the bitmap of each pixel the signal visits. Similarly, the `imageToSIgnalLUT` tells you what position in the signal corresponds to a particular pixel. This makes it easy to click on the bitmap and play an audio sample corresponding exactly to the location you clicked, or to transcode an audio signal into RGB pixel values and display them in a bitmap. 

The `PixelAudioMapper` class and the `PixelMapGen` class and its subclasses provide the core functionality of the library and are abundantly commented. PixelMapGen provides a lightweight framework for creating mappings between audio sample and pixel data arrays. PixelMapGen subclasses plug in to PixelAudioMapper, which can read and write pixel and audio data while remaining independent of the mappings and the actual audio and image formats. It should be relatively easy to write your own PixelMapGen child class and have it immediately available to play with through PixelAudioMapper's methods. PixelAudioMapper also provides many static methods for working with audio and pixel arrays. Other notable classes include the `WaveSynth` class, which uses `WaveData` objects for additive audio synthesis to create both a playable audio signal and an animated image that are generated in parallel. Some of the coding examples show how you can read and write JSON files of WaveSynth configurations. Other animation and audio classes are in the works. 

The examples currently provide a survey of features in the PixelAudio library, particularly for mapping audio signals and bitmaps, using JSON files for WaveSynth and PixelMapGen settings, capturing live audio, playing audio samples, and mixing color channels. There are whole sections yet to be added, but there's enough to get started, if you are curious. See the [Examples README](https://github.com/Ignotus-mago/PixelAudio/tree/master/examples "Examples README") for descriptions of each example.

At this point (August 1, 2024) PixelAudio is at the alpha testing stage, functional but incomplete (so not yet beta). You can download it as a Processing library and run the examples and expect them to do interesting things. You will need the [minim audio library](https://code.compartmental.net/tools/minim/), which can be installed with Processing's Import Library... command. I plan to release the library November 9, 2024, at [Experimental Sound Studio](https://ess.org/) in Chicago, where I am currently an artist in residence.

The PixelAudio library replaces an earlier library, PixelScanner, that was never released in a public version. It can still be found on my GitHub pages, with some of the code in PixelAudio included. Many of PixelScanner's classes have vanished from PixelAudio, replaced by a better scheme for class functionality with far less duplication of code. Here's a sample video created with the previous PixelScanner library (https://vimeo.com/767814419), part of my project for [150 Media Stream](https://150mediastream.com/). An early demo of features for PixelAudio can be found here: (https://vimeo.com/880911064).

